== VirtualShelf

A virtual shelf browse application for (Aleph) library catalogs as a Rails Engine.

== Installation and Initial Configuration

<em>Note 1: these instructions assume that you will be creating a new Rails application to use with this engine. This engine can be used with an existing Rails application, but doing so will require manual changes to +routes.rb+ to change the mount path.</em>

<em>Note 2: Some familiarity with Rails may be required to set up this application.</em>

First, create a new Rails application:

  $ rails new my_app

The VirtualShelf engine requires Rails ~> 3.2.13, but will probably work with other versions.

Enter your Rails app directory and take a look at your application files:

  $ cd my_app

Edit your +Gemfile+ by adding this line at the end of the file

  gem 'virtual-shelf', :git => 'git://github.com/kardeiz/virtual-shelf.git'

You will also want to install gems for your database connection, e.g.:
  gem 'mysql2'
  gem 'sqlite3'

You will also need to add some other gems (for asset management):

  gem 'therubyracer'
  gem 'less-rails'

Save your file and install your gems:

  $ bundle install

Next, initialize the engine:

  $ rails generate virtual_shelf:initialize

This command copies over an initialization file to +config/initializers/virtual_shelf_initialize.rb+, adds a line to +config/routes.rb+ to mount the engine at the document root, and adds a line to load the engine files in +config/application.rb+.

Next, copy over the database migration files (assuming you have added the gems necessary for your database connection and have set up +config/database.yml+ as needed), and run the migrations:

  $ rake virtual_shelf:install:migrations
  $ rake db:migrate

Take a look at +config/initializers/virtual_shelf_initialize.rb+ and reset config values to ones appropriate for your catalog. Some of these options will be described in more detail below (e.g., +config.thumbnails_base_url+).

== Load Records from Aleph Catalog Database

Ensure you have set the appropriate table and field names in +config/initializers/virtual_shelf_initialize.rb+.

In your +Gemfile+, add gems for the Oracle connection, e.g.:

  gem 'ruby-oci8'
  gem 'activerecord-oracle_enhanced-adapter'

In +config/database.yml+, add configuration settings for your Aleph catalog database connection, naming the connection +oracle_db+. It should look something like this:

  oracle_db:
    database: servername.tld:9999/whatever
    pool: 5
    timeout: 5000
    username: username
    password: password

Assuming everything is configured correctly, you can then load your catalog records into the VirtualShelf database:

  $ rake virtual_shelf:load_records

This task will take a long time (hours), due mostly to a non-conventional join on the Z11 and Z30 tables. Pull requests that improve this step are more than welcome.

Note that there is also a +load_recent_records+ task that will load all records created in the last week. You may wish to schedule this as a weekly +cron+ task.

== Setting up Cover Thumbnails

This application is designed to use the Open Library Cover thumbnails, made available via {their website}[http://openlibrary.org/dev/docs/api/covers]. This application assumes the use of the "medium" sized thumbnails, although other sizes could be made to work with some style changes.

Download the covers and place them on an accessible server (can be separate from this application). Point the application to the location of your covers by setting the appropriate value for +config.thumbnails_base_url+ in +config/initializers/virtual_shelf_initialize.rb+. Note that +cid_tag+ refers to the assigned thumbnail ID. This block uses a Ruby +slice+ operation on a +String+: refer to the {Ruby documentation}[http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/String.html#method-i-slice] for more information. 

Download and unzip the Open Library mappings TSV file (from their website). Then run:

  $ rake filename="<path to your OL mappings file>" virtual_shelf:load_covers

This process will take a long time. It may be faster to convert the TSV file into an appropriately manipulated CSV file to load directly into your database.

== Running the Application

Assuming everything has worked so far, you can visit your virtual catalog by running

  $ rails server

and visiting localhost:3000/records/<document number> in your browser. If you see an error about not finding a class, try adding <tt>config.cache_store = :null_store</tt> to your +config/environments/development.rb+ file.

== Loading as an Iframe

You will notice that these pages lack any branding. This is because (at TCU), the VirtualShelf application is configured to load within an iframe within library catalog pages.

To load the VirtualShelf application in a similar manner for your catalog, add the following line to the appropriate template file:

  <script src="<your site's url>/virtual_shelf/catalog/load.js" type="text/javascript"></script>

This file sets up a JQuery UI modal and handles a click event (loading page as an iframe in this modal).

You will also want to add a link to trigger the iframe load/display as follows:

  <a href="https://virtualshelf.tcu.edu/records/<document_number>" class="virtual-shelf">Virtual Browse</a>

where +document_number+ is generated dynamically by your catalog system.

== Notices

This application comes with no warranty, although you are welcome to open an issue at any time.

For more advanced configuration options, feel free to fork the gem or make local edits. You can do this by following these steps:

1. Download the repository: <tt>$ cd .. && git clone git://github.com/kardeiz/virtual-shelf.git</tt>
2. Make your changes.
3. Change the line in +Gemfile+ from <tt>gem 'virtual-shelf', :git => 'git://github.com/kardeiz/virtual-shelf.git'</tt> to <tt>gem 'virtual-shelf', :path => '../virtual-shelf'</tt>

Assets can be overriden by creating files at +app/assets/images/virtual_shelf/+, +app/assets/javascripts/virtual_shelf/+, or +app/assets/stylesheets/virtual_shelf/+.

You may also request additional configuration options as issues.

This application requires the {Twitter Bootstrap Rails}[https://github.com/seyhunak/twitter-bootstrap-rails] gem. This gem (v. 2.2.6, since 2.2.7 was having issues at time of writing) will be installed automatically.

This application uses generic cover icons from {Font Awesome}[http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/]. These can be overridden by placing appropriately named files in +app/assets/images/virtual_shelf/+.

This application contains a controller and JavaScript to load cover thumbnails from the Google Books API. It is your responsibility to ensure that your application complies with the {Google Books Terms of Service}[https://developers.google.com/books/terms].

Pull requests are welcome, especially if you are a Rails developer and notice areas for improvement.

This project uses the license specified in MIT-LICENSE.
